today I'm doing Chapter five the reality
of abstractions here we learn about the
fact that there's not only physical
material in the universe but rather
there's also some other kind of part to
reality mainly there are abstractions
and these abstractions can have real
causal effects on physical things like
atoms the reason why something like that
ends up taking the shape that it does
has nothing to do with self-organization
and physical forces it cannot be
explained purely in terms of the motion
of atoms and it can't be reduced to laws
of motion or any kind of law of physics
instead the explanation is that a great
architect called Gaudi some 100 years
ago decided to create something like
that the idea was originally represented
inside of his mind the idea was
originally some kind of neural firings
inside of his brain but they can't be
reduced to that either was an idea
abstract idea he had plans he put it
down on paper
and then over many many years it's
beginning to take form or beginning to
be instantiated in the rock and stone
and mortar and other materials that make
up an absolutely phenomenal building
like this one it's only partially
complete and apparently it's gonna be
some decades before it finally is this
is in Barcelona Spain so with a great
building something like gaudi's
Cathedral what we have is an idea that a
somehow taken physical form and this
brings us to a kind of Judaism it really
is the notion that in reality there are
two ways of speaking about what exists
certainly material things exist but
that's not all that exists because the
material things can be arranged into
particular patterns and in particular
what we can have is kinds of patterns we
call these ideas ideas are things that
can be
Stanzi ated within physical substrates
and whether that physical substrate
happens to be ink on paper or electrical
signals in the brain or indeed messages
inside of a computer the point is that
these ideas are something over and above
the mere atoms the particles the
physical things so there really are two
kinds of things in reality there's
physical things stuff made out of atoms
and there's abstract things patterns
within those atoms we can have ideas
about things like mathematics which
refer to abstract introduce themselves
so these are abstract concepts about
other abstract concepts they can be
things like physical laws the
explanation of physical laws is itself
an abstract concept so a realist is
committed to the idea that abstract
things exists that there are two kinds
of existence in reality physical things
and abstract things this doesn't commit
us to any kind of woo or supernatural
kind of force or spirituality all that
it says is that the way in which
physical things are arranged is not
haphazard it's not chaotic there's
something more to it and even more
profound the abstract things can cause
things to occur in physics the abstract
things can cause stuff to happen they
really are the proximate and indeed
ultimate cause of many kinds of events
that happen in the universe particularly
when it comes to people so let's read a
little from chapter 5 the beginning of
infinity called the reality of
abstractions and we'll see what David
has to say about how abstract things
cause stuff to happen and to how they
are the explanation of things happening
in physical reality
he writes the fundamental theories of
modern physics explain the world in
jarring their counterintuitive ways for
example most physicists consider it
self-evident that when you hold your arm
out horizontally you can feel the force
of gravity pulling it downwards but you
cannot the existence of a force of
gravity is astonishingly denied by
Einstein's general theory of relativity
one of the two deepest theories of
physics I'll pause there this is me
speaking I read a little about this on
my website you can go go to WWE hall org
and there's a section there on general
relativity and it speaks about why
gravity is indeed not a force so you can
google that gravity is not a force I
think is the name of the article I'll
continue David writes this says that the
only force on your arm in that situation
is the one which you yourself are
exerting upwards to keep it constantly
accelerating away from the straightest
possible path in a curved region of
space-time the reality described by our
other deepest theory quantum theory
which I shall describe in chapter 11 is
even more counterintuitive to understand
explanations like those physicists have
to learn to think about everyday events
in new ways the guiding principle is as
always to reject bad explanations in
favor of good ones in regard to what is
or is not real this leads to the
requirement that if an entity is
referred to by our best explanation in
the relevant field we must regard it as
really existing I'll pause there this
harks back to a section right at the
beginning in one of the early chapters
of the fabric of reality the criteria
for existence and the criteria of
existence is said right there halloween'
off something actually exists in reality
well the way in which we know it exists
it's not by our senses it's not via us
being able to detect it by seeing it or
hearing it that's not what we mean by
something actually existing because our
sensors are fallible we can make
mistakes we can see things that aren't
really there we can elucidate things can
go wrong
things can still go wrong with our
explanations but the best way to decide
whether or not something actually exists
is whether or not it is referred
to buy our best explanations is what
David says so our best explanation of
how matter works requires us to believe
believe requires us to invoke the
existence of atoms of particles and
those particles are made up of protons
and neutrons and electrons so we're
committed to the idea that electrons
really do exist we can't get away with
explaining physical reality without
referring to electrons now when it comes
to something like ghosts well none of
our best explanations of anything
require us to speak in terms of ghosts
people might think they've seen ghosts
but that is not a good explanation
usually in those situations what has
happened is that people have simply made
mistakes so let's continue furthermore
everyday events are cheap endlessly
complex when expressed in terms of
fundamental physics if you fill a kettle
with water and switch it on all the
supercomputers on earth working for the
age of the universe could not solve the
equations that predict what all those
water molecules will do even if we could
somehow determine their initial state
and that of all the outside influences
on them which itself is an intractable
task so I just have to move my camera
there a little bit okay let's continue
fortunately some of that complexity
resolves itself into a higher-level
simplicity for example we can predict
with some accuracy how long the water
will take to boil to do so we need only
a few physical quantities that are quite
easy to measure such as its mass the
power of the heating element and so on
for greater accuracy we may also need
information about subtler properties
such as the number and type of
nucleation sites for bubbles but these
are still relatively high level
phenomena composed of interactively
large numbers of interacting atomic
level phenomena thus there is a class of
higher-level phenomena including the
liquidity of the water and the
relationship between containers heating
elements boiling and bubbles that can be
explained that can be well explained in
terms of each other alone with no direct
reference to anything at the atomic
level or below in other words
the behavior of that whole class of
high-level phenomena is quasi autonomous
almost self-contained this resolution
into explicable 'ti at a higher quasi
autonomous level is known as emergence
so we just pause there he introduces the
concept of emergence which many science
popularizers and many scientists have
written about over the years often in
the quite confused way but this is
exceptionally clear it there's nothing
particularly mysterious of an emergent
phenomena except that they exist that
somehow the laws of physics are such
that particles arrange themselves in
ways that give rise to higher-level
simplicity and that higher-level
simplicity obeys its own laws it doesn't
violate it's not possible for it to
violate the laws of physics so when we
say it obeys its own laws that doesn't
mean in contradiction to the laws of
physics
it simply means these higher-level laws
themselves emerge and govern the
behavior of those higher-level
simple structures so let's continue
he writes emergent phenomena are a tiny
minority we can predict when the water
will boil and that the bubbles will form
when it does but if you wanted to
predict where each bubble will go or to
be precise what the probabilities of its
various possible motions are so a
chapter 11 you would be out of luck
still less it is feasible to predict the
countless microscopically defined
properties of the water such as whether
an odd or even number of its electrons
will be affected by the heating during
any given period
okay so I'll pause there and just refer
you to a little self-indulgent to
another one of my articles this one
about free will and I think it's
important to note here that I regard
freewill as a kind of emergent
simplicity
when people say that free will isn't
possible because the laws of physics
away already mandate what is going to
happen in the universe in other words
everything is already determined it
simply ignores the fact that there is
such a thing as really existing emergent
phenomena so we cannot escape from the
fact that the laws of physics govern all
things that happen in the universe but
that doesn't mean that you can't have
higher-order simplicity things like
people making choices and so this is my
attempt to explain freewill in terms of
this higher level simple structure so
again you can look up Brett Hall
emergence and freewill so I'll continue
ok I'm skipping a little and he writes
the behavior of high level physical
quantities consists of nothing but the
behavior of their low-level constituents
with most of the details ignored this
has given rise to a widespread
misconception about emergence and
explanation known as reductionism the
doctrine that science always explains
and predicts things reductively ie by
analyzing them into components often it
does as we will use the fact that inter
atomic forces are by the law of
conservation of energy to make and
explain a high level prediction that the
kettle cannot boil water without a power
supply but reductionism requires at the
exit that the relationship between
different levels of explanation always
have to be like that and often it is not
for example as I write in the fabric of
reality consider one particular copper
atom at the tip of the nose of the
Statue of Sir Winston Churchill that
stands in Parliament Square in London
now I'm not going to read that passage I
would just encourage everyone to grab
the fabric of reality or grab the
beginning of infinity and read that for
themselves it's not seeing ironic that
I'm reading passages and I'm not going
to read one of my favorite passages in
both books and it's a it's a it's a
brilliant passage because it it
articulates in a very profound way
the difference between reductionism as a
dogma and how we go about
actually explaining what happens in the
universe not everything is explicable in
terms of the laws of physics and I'm not
going to read a passage but I'll give
you a flavor of what the passage is it's
this idea that if you want to explain
where a particular copper at Amir's but
if it's at the nose of the Statue of
Winston Churchill then trying to explain
the position of that copper atom in
terms of laws of motion and initial
conditions stretching back to the Big
Bang in order to try and predict that
the copper atom is being bumped in
sequence over and again until such time
as it arrives at the tip of the nose of
Winston Churchill you don't explain
anything however if instead you talk
about the copper atoms as being part of
a brass statue and statues are made out
of brass so that they don't corrode away
and we'd like to make statues of
important people like Winston Churchill
who prevented the Second World War from
being a victory for the Nazis that is an
explanation why is the copper atom there
or copped that the copper atom is there
because it's part of brass and brass is
there because we make statues out of it
we make statues out of it because we'd
like to remember important historical
figures that's the explanation of why
the copper atom is there and that is an
actual explanation as to why but you
won't get the why if you say oh that's
the laws of physics it is just
determined that the copper atom was
going to be there and in precisely the
same way if you try and explain what
people do if you attempt to explain it
in terms of deterministic laws then you
ignore the high level causative
structure that exists in the universe
namely emergence and one of the most
parsimonious ways to explain what people
choose to do one thing or the other is
freewill if you're trying to say well
they were compelled to do that in the
first place because there are these
lower-level laws be there laws of
neuroscience or neurobiology or even
deeper the laws of physics you're
missing the difference between
explanation and prediction
and although an Oracle who has access to
the perfect laws of physics and initial
conditions would be able to predict what
people do in other words their behavior
is perfectly determined in the same way
that the copper atom was perfectly
determined to end up where it was that
predictive story is not an explanation
there's a difference there's a really
important difference okay so I'm
skipping a bit and David goes through
arguments against reductionism and then
arguments against its mirror image
called holism this whole ism idea is
something that the you often hear from
you know natural therapies type people
this idea that we should treat diseases
of the body by looking at the entire
body as a whole rather than focusing on
a specific problem with the body
so David criticizes all those and he
writes all those doctrines are
irrational for the same reason they
advocate accepting or rejecting theories
on grounds other than whether they are
good explanations whenever a high-level
explanation does follow logically from
low-level ones that also means that the
high level one implies something about
the low level ones thus additional high
level theories provided that they were
that they were all consistent would
place more and more constraints on what
the low level theories could be so it
could be that all the high level
explanations that exist taken together
imply all the low level ones as well as
vice-versa or it could be that some low
level some intermediate level and some
high level explanations taken together
imply all explanations I guess that that
is so you're right
okay so I'll pause there so this is an
interesting way of speaking about
explanations and laws if you like there
are these lower level laws of physics
but in a sense they're constrained by
what we learn about the way in which
high level explanations work the high
level explanations what we know about
them constrains what actually happens at
the lower level or what we know about
what happens the lower level we can't
violate the laws of physics but we also
can't go violating just any old high
level explanation as well the
explanations work in both directions
okay so I continue
I'm skipping again a significant chunk
here he writes in any case emergent
phenomena are essential to the
explicable 'ti of the world long before
humans had much explanatory knowledge
they were able to control nature by
using rules of thumb rule of thumb have
explanations and those explanations were
about high-level regularities among
emergent phenomena such as fire and
rocks long before that it was only genes
that were encoding rules of thumb and
the knowledge in them too was about
emergent phenomena thus emergence is
another beginning of infinity all
knowledge creation depends on and
physically consists of emergent
phenomena emergence is also responsible
for the fact that discoveries can be
made in successive steps thus providing
scope for the scientific method the
partial success of each theory in a
sequence of improving theories is
tantamount to the existence of a layer
of phenomena that each Theory explains
successfully though as it then turns out
partly mistakenly successive scientific
explanations are occasionally dissimilar
in the way they explain their
predictions even in the domain where the
predictions themselves are similar or
identical
for instance Einsteins explanation of
planetary motion does not merely correct
Newton's it is radically different
denying among other things the very
existence of central elements of
Newton's explanation such as the
gravitational force and the uniformly
flowing time with respect to which
Newton defined motion likewise the
astronomer Johannes Kepler's theory
which said that the planets move in
ellipses did not merely correct the
celestial sphere theory it denied the
spheres existence and Newton's did not
substitute a new shape for Kepler's
ellipses but a whole new way for laws to
specify motions through infinitesimally
defined quantities like instantaneous
velocity and acceleration thus each of
those theories of planetary motion was
ignoring or denying its predecessors
basic means of explaining what was
happening out there this has been used
as an argument for instrumentalism
as follows each successive theory made
small but accurate Corrections
what its predecessor predicted and was
therefore a bit of fury in that sense
but since each Theory's explanation
swept away that of the previous theory
the previous theories explanation was
never true in the first place and so one
cannot regard those successive
explanations as constituting a growth of
knowledge about reality from Kepler to
Newton to Einstein we have successively
no force needed to explain orbits and
inverse square law Nader tweaks
responsible for every orbit and again no
force needed so how could Newton's force
of gravity as distinct from his
equations predicting its effects ever
have been in advance in human knowledge
it could and was because sweeping away
the entities through which a theory
makes its explanation is not the same as
sweeping away the whole of the
explanation although there is no force
of gravity it is true that something
real the curvature of space-time caused
by the Sun has a strength that varies
approximately according to Newton's
inverse square law and affects the
motion of objects seen and unseen
Newton's theory also correctly explained
that laws of gravitation are the same
for terrestrial and celestial objects it
made a novel distinction between mass
the measure of an object's resistance to
being accelerated and weight the force
required to prevent an object from
falling under gravity and it said that
the gravitational effect of an object
depends on its mass and not other
attributes such as its density or
composition later Einstein's theory not
only endorsed all those features but
explained in turn why they asked her
Newton's theory to had been able to make
more accurate predictions than at
predecessors precisely because it was
more right than they were about what was
really happening before that even
Kepler's explanation had included
important elements of the true
explanation planetary orbits and indeed
determined by laws of nature those laws
of nature are indeed the same for all
planets including earth they do invoke
the Sun they are mathematical in
geometrical in character and so on with
the hindsight provided by each
successive theory we can see not only
where the previous theory made false
predictions but also that where ever it
made true predictions this was because
it had expressed some truth about
reality
so which truth lives on in the new
theory as Einstein remark there could be
no fear of destiny
for any physical theory then it should
point the way to a more comprehensive
theory in which it lives on as a
limiting case our pause there I've been
engaged in some discussions recently
about the existence of truth and whether
or not it can be found there's a school
of philosophy called skepticism and the
skeptics seem to believe that we cannot
obtain truth but we cannot know when
we've attained truth and this is why
fallibilist
don't think that agree insofar as we
cannot get to the final truth but this
doesn't mean we can't find any truth at
all what we have access to is
provisional truth and the reason we know
we can have access to provisional truth
is for the reasons articulated in the
passage right there so let me just
reread a little bit where david has said
wherever it the previous theory made
true predictions this was because it had
expressed some truth about reality so
true predictions in other words the
prediction worked but why did the
prediction work well the product rule
worked because there must have been
something about reality that the theory
got correct
doesn't mean it got the whole lot
correct but the fact that it did get it
correct means it got something right
something true was stated these things
are synonyms as far as I'm concerned
we're just talking about the same thing
there's a reality out there and when we
make statements about that reality that
work we've said something true now we
might not know precisely which part of
the theory is true until sometime later
in retrospect but we are able to get
some of this truth sometimes not the
final truth not ultimate truth
provisional truth truth that works truth
that enables us to make progress and the
reason we make progress is because we
are improving by objective standards our
theories I'm going to skip a little more
and then read a little more
David writes and this is a sort of
esoteric thing that philosophers of
science like to talk about but I will
mention it so he writes by the way it is
something of a misconception that the
predictions of successive theories of
planetary motion were all that similar
Newton's predictions are indeed
excellent in the context of
bridge-building and only slightly
inadequate when running the global
positioning system but they are
hopelessly wrong when explaining a
pulsar or closer or the universe as a
whole to get all those right one needs
iron Stein's radically different
explanations such large discontinuities
in the meanings of successive scientific
theories have no biological analog in an
evolving species the dominant strain of
each generation differs only slightly
from that in the previous generation
nevertheless scientific discovery is a
gradual process - it is just that in
science all the gradualness and nearly
all the criticism and rejection of bad
explanations takes place inside the
scientists minds as popper put it we can
let our theories die in our place
I'm skipping forward to the place where
he gets to the meat of the matter namely
abstractions and he writes that brings
me to the main subject of this chapter
abstractions in Chapter four i remark
that pieces of knowledge are abstract
replicators that use its effect
organisms and brains to get themselves
replicated that is a higher level of
explanation than the emergent levels
I've mentioned so far it's a claim that
something abstract something
non-physical such as knowledge in a gene
or a theory is affecting something
physical again this is one of those
profound passages where it's no good
just reading it once you really have to
meditate on that for a moment so I just
want to read that last sentence again it
is a claim that something abstract
something non-physical such as the
knowledge in a gene or a theory is
affecting something physical
he continues physically nothing is
happening in such a situation other than
that one set of emergent entity such as
jeans or computers is affecting others
which is already anathema to
reductionism but abstractions are
essential to a fuller explanation you
know that if your computer beats you at
chess it really is the program that has
beaten you not the silicon atoms or the
computer as such the abstract program is
instantiated physically as a high level
behavior of vast numbers of atoms but
the explanation of why it has beaten you
cannot be expressed without also
referring to the program in its own
right that program has also been
instantiated unchanged in a long chain
of different physical substrates
including neurons in the brains of the
programmers in radio waves when you
downloaded a program via wireless
networking and finally estates of long
and short term memory banks in your
computer the specifics of that chain of
instantiations may be relevant to
explaining how the program reached you
but it is irrelevant
to why it beats you there the content of
the knowledge in it ending new is the
whole story that story is an explanation
that our first ineluctably to
abstractions and therefore those
abstractions exist and really do affect
physical objects in a way required by
the explanation the next section is a
section that summarizes part of Douglas
Hofstadter's work and I think it is a
powerful excuse the pun knockdown
argument about the reality of
abstractions so I'll come back to that
in a moment
so let's get to ha status argument David
writes the computer scientist Douglas
Hofstadter has a nice argument that this
sort of explanation is essential in
understanding certain phenomena in his
book I am a strange loop 2007 he
imagines a special-purpose computer
built of millions of dominoes they are
set up as dominoes often are for fun
standing on end close together so that
if one of them is knocked over it
strikes its neighbor and so a whole
stretch of dominoes falls one after
another but Hofstadter's dominoes are
spring-loaded in such a
that whenever one is knocked over it
pops back up after a fixed time hence
when a domino falls away evil signal or
falling dominoes propagates along the
stretch in the direction in which it
fell until it reaches either a dead end
or are currently fallen Domino by
arranging these dominoes in a network
with looping bifurcating and rejoining
stretches one can make these signals
combine and interact in a sufficiently
rich repertoire of ways to make a hole
to make the whole construction into a
computer a signal traveling down a
stretch can be interpreted as a binary
one and the lack of a signal as a binary
0 and the interactions between such
signals can implement a repertoire of
operations such as and or and not out of
which arbitrary computations can be
composed one Domino is designated as the
on switch when it is knocked over the
Domino computer begins to execute the
program that is instantiated in its
loops and stretches the program and hopf
status thought-experiment computes
whether a given number is a prime or not
one inputs of that number by placing a
stretch of exactly that many dominoes at
a specified position before tripping the
on switch elsewhere in the network a
particular Domino will deliver the
output over the computation it will fall
only if I divisor is found indicating
that the input was not prime Hostetter
sets the input to number 641 which is a
prime and trips the on switch flurries
of motion begin to sweep back and forth
across the network or 641 of the input
dominoes soon fall as the computation
reads its input and snapped back up and
participate in further intricate
patterns it is a lengthy process because
this is a rather inefficient way to
perform computations but it does the job
now Hostetler imagines that an observer
who does not know the purpose of the
Domino network watches the Domino's
performing and notices that one
particular Domino remains resolutely
standing never affected by any of the
waves of downs and up sweeping by he
david quotes a part of i am a strange
loop where Hofstadter writes
The Observer points at that Domino and
asks with curiosity how come that Domino
there is never falling back to B iy
beginning of infinity we know that that
is the output Domino but the observer
does not Hofstadter continues let me
contrast two different types of answer
that someone might give the first type
of answer myopic to the point of
silliness would be because its
predecessor never Falls you dummy
in David writes or if it has two or more
neighbors because none of its neighbors
ever fall Hofstadter writes to be sure
this is as correct as far as it goes but
it doesn't go real far it just passes
the buck to a different Domino back to
David in fact one could keep passing the
buck from Domino to Domino to provide
ever more detailed answers that were
silly but correct as far as they go
eventually one one had passed the buck
billions of times many more times than
there are dominoes because the program
loops one would arrive at the first
Domino the on switch at that point the
reductive to high level physics
explanation would be in summary that
Domino did not fall because none of the
patterns of motion initiated by knocking
over the on switch ever included but we
knew that already we can reach that
conclusion as we just have without going
through that laborious process and it is
undeniably true but it is not the
explanation we were looking for because
it is addressing a different question
predictive rather than explanatory
namely if the first domino falls will
the output Domino ever fall and it is
asking at the wrong level of emergence
what we asked was why does it not fall
to enter that Hofstetter then adopts a
different mode of explanation at the
right level of emergence where
Hofstetter writes the second type of
answer would be because 641 is prime now
this answer while just as correct indeed
in some sense it is far more on the mark
has the curious property of not talking
about anything physical at all not only
has the focus moved upwards to
collective properties these properties
sum
transcend the physical and have to do
with pure abstractions such as prime
ality end quote David writes that
Hofstadter concludes the point of this
example is that 641 s prime allottee is
the best explanation perhaps even the
only explanation for why certain
dominoes did fall and certain others did
not fall just to correct that slightly
david writes the physics based
explanation is true as well and the
physics of the dominoes is also
essential to explaining why prime
numbers are relevant to that particular
arrangement of them but Hofstadter's
argument does show that prime ality must
be part of any full explanation of why
the dominoes did or did not fall hence
it is a refutation of reductionism in
regards to abstractions for the theory
of prime numbers is not part of physics
it refers not to physical objects but to
abstract entities such as numbers of
which there is an infinite set or pause
there this is why I regard myself as a
duelist
there is a single reality out there this
was the idea that Spinoza had there's
one reality however there are two kinds
of real existing objects within that
reality there is stuff made of atoms the
physical world and then there's stuff
that's not made of atoms the abstract
world
there's nothing spiritual or spooky
about the abstract world it consists of
things like numbers and those numbers
have properties those properties include
things like whether they have multiple
factors or not if they don't and they
only have themselves and one as factors
then they have the property that they
are prime numbers in which case we have
this rich class of structures out there
in abstract reality that have relations
among themselves but more profoundly the
abstract entities can have causal
effects on the physical world now how do
they have causal effects in the physical
world because the physical world is
organized in patterns in such a way that
the abstract entities
instantiated within that physical
reality and the relationships between
the abstract entities are represented
within the physical world there's
nothing mysterious here there's no extra
forces that are that are required in
order to push things around we still
have the same force as we do in physics
now the next part that data talks about
is a little bit within the wheelhouse of
Sam Harris and a little bit within the
wheelhouse of Buddhists and sort of an
interest of people who are interested in
this question of personhood which I
certainly am so I'm going to read that
now David writes unfortunately in
speaking about how Hofstadter has just
distinguished between two kinds of
really existing things namely the
physical and the abstract David writes
unfortunately Hofstadter goes on to
disown his own argument and to embrace
reductionism why his book is primarily
about one particular emergent phenomenon
the mind or as he puts it the eye
he asks whether the mind can be
consistently thought of as affecting the
body causing it to do one thing rather
than another
given the all-embracing nature of the
laws of physics this is known as the
mind-body problem for instance we often
explain our actions in terms of choosing
one action rather than another but our
bodies including our brains are
completely controlled by the laws of
physics leaving no physical variable
free for an eye to effect in order to
make such a choice or Paul say that's
the determine is an argument against
free will people who think that
determinism is incompatible with free
will these people who think determinism
is incompatible with free will tend to
also think that determinism is
incompatible with abstract entities if
abstract entities can have causal
effects in the world than the I being an
abstract entity also cannot have causal
effects in the world so these people
would have it but that's not possible as
we have seen the dominoes fall down
because the abstract concept of prime
ality is the explanation as to why a
particular Domino did or did not fall so
I'll continue with beginning of infinity
following the philosopher Daniel Dennett
Hofstadter eventually concludes that the
AI is an illusion minds he concludes
can't push material stuff around because
physical law alone would not suffice to
determine its behavior hence
reductionism and now David writes
something very very important he writes
but first of all physical laws can't
push anything either
they only explain and predict and they
are not our only explanations the theory
that the domino stands because 641 is
prime and because the Domino Network
instantiates a prime ality testing
algorithm is an exceedingly good
explanation what is wrong with it it
does not contradict the laws of physics
it explains more than any explanation
purely in terms of those laws and no
known variant of it can do the same job
second that reductionist argument would
deny that an atom can push in the sense
of cause to move another atom since the
initial state of the universe together
with the laws of motion has already
determined the state at every other time
third the very idea of causes emergent
in abstract it is mentioned nowhere in
the laws of motion about elementary
particles and as the philosopher David
Hume pointed out we cannot perceive
causation only a succession of events
also the laws of motion are conservative
that is to say they do not lose
information that means that just as they
determine the final state of any motion
given the initial State they also given
they also determine the initial state
given the final state and this state at
any time from the state at any other
time so at that level of explanation
cause and effect are interchangeable and
are not what we mean when we say that a
program causes a computer to win at
chess or the de domino remains standing
because 641 is prime there is no
inconsistency in having multiple
explanations of the same phenomenon at
different levels of emergence regarding
micro physical explanations as more
fundamental in emerging ones is an
arbitrary and fallacious there is no
escape from Hofstadter 641 argument no
reason to want one the world may or may
not be as we wish it to be and to reject
good explanations on that account is to
imprison oneself in parochial error so
the answer because 641 is prime does
explain the immunity of that Domino the
theory of prime numbers on which that
answer depends is not a law of physics
nor an X nor an approximation to one it
is about abstract
and infinite sets of them at that such
as the set of natural numbers 1 2 3 etc
etc there is no mystery how we can have
knowledge of infinitely large things
like the set of all natural numbers that
is just a matter of reach versions of
number theory that can find themselves
too small natural numbers would have to
be so full of arbitrary qualifiers
workarounds and unanswered questions
that they will be very bad explanations
until they would generalize to the case
that make sense without such ad hoc
restrictions the infinite case I shall
discuss various sorts of infinity in
Chapter eight skipping just a short
paragraph now and David writes our own
brains are computers which we can use to
learn about things beyond the physical
world including pure mathematical
abstractions this ability to understand
abstractions is an emergent property of
people which greatly puzzled the ancient
Athenian philosopher Plato he noticed
that the theorems of geometry such as
Pythagoras's theorem are about entities
that I never experienced perfectly
straight lines with no thickness
intersecting each other on a perfect
plane to make a perfect triangle these
are not possible objects of any
observation and yet people knew about
them and not just superficially at the
time such knowledge was the deepest
knowledge of anything that human beings
had ever had where did it come from
Plato concluded that it and all human
knowledge must come from the
supernatural it was right that it could
not have come from observation but then
it could not have even if people had
been able to observe perfect triangles
as arguably they could today using
virtual reality as I explained in
Chapter one empiricism has multiple
fatal flaws but it is no mystery where
our knowledge of abstractions comes from
it comes from conjecture like all our
knowledge and through criticism and
seeking good explanations it is only
empiricism that made it seem plausible
that knowledge outside of science is
inaccessible and it is only the
justified true belief misconception that
make such knowledge seem less justified
than scientific theories as I explained
in Chapter one even in science almost
all rejected theories are rejected for
being bad explanations without ever
being tested experimental testing is
only one of many men
of criticism used in science and the
Enlightenment has made progress by
bringing those other methods to bear in
non-scientific fields as well the basic
reason that such progress is possible is
the good explanations about
philosophical issues are as hard to find
as in science and criticism is
correspondingly effective I'm skipping a
little here in the and then he gets into
a different class of abstract entities
moral entities so let's have a read
about what he says there in the case of
moral philosophy the empiricist and
justification askance Epsons
are often expressed in the maxim that
you can't derive a naught from an is a
paraphrase or a remark by the
Enlightenment philosopher David Hume it
means that moral theories cannot be
deduced from factual knowledge this has
become conventional wisdom and as a
resulted in a kind of dogmatic despair
about morality
you can't derive a naught from an is
therefore morality cannot be justified
by reason that leaves only two options
either to embrace and reason or to try
living without ever making moral
judgment botha liable to lead to morally
wrong choices just as embracing unreason
we're never attempting to explain the
physical world leads to factually false
theories and not just ignorance I'll
pause there so this has been part of the
recent uptick in philosophical interest
about morality in the popular on any
online community we're here Jordan
Peterson and Sam Harris talking about
exactly the same issue this idea that
because we can't derive a nought from an
ears many people choose one or two paths
the first is to head towards unreason
and I think that what we're hinting at
here when we come to unreason is a kind
of dogma so you give up trying to
improve your theories you settle on a
particular idea moral code religious or
otherwise and you refuse to change it
it's a form of unreason or you move into
relativism where you simply say I cannot
make any moral judgments and this all
stems from this justification astre
steak or empiricist mistake that you
can't derive an ottoman is david writes
on this in the next paragraph certainly
you can't derive a naught Furman is but
you can't derive a factual theory from
an
either that is not what science does the
growth of knowledge does not consist of
finding ways to justify one's beliefs it
consists of finding good explanations
and although factual evidence and moral
Maxim's are logically independent
factual and moral explanations are not
thus factual knowledge can be useful in
criticizing moral explanations for
example in the 19th century of an
American slave had written a
best-selling book that event would not
logically have ruled out the proposition
Negroes are intended by Providence to be
slaves no experience could because that
is a philosophical theory but it might
have ruined the explanations through
which many people understood that
proposition and if as a result such
people had found themselves unable to
explain to their own satisfaction why it
would be providential if that author
were to be forced back into slavery then
they might have questioned the account
that they had formerly accepted of what
a black person really is and what a
person in general is and then a good
person a good society and so on
conversely advocates of highly immoral
doctrines almost invariably believe
associated factual falsehoods as well
for instance ever since the attack on
the United States and on 11 September
2001 millions of people worldwide have
believed it was carried out by the US
government or the Israeli Secret Service
those are purely factual misconceptions
yet they bear the imprint of moral
wrongness just as clearly as a fossil
made of purely inorganic material bear
bears the imprint of ancient life and
the link in both cases is explanation to
correct a moral explanation for why
Westerners deserve to be killed
indiscriminate one needs to explain
factually that the West is not what it
pretends to be
and that requires uncritical acceptance
of conspiracy theories denial of history
and so on so there me talking again
there we have this concept about
derivation and people are fixated on the
idea especially morality about trying to
derive moral theories from a set of
facts about the real world but you can't
derive
you can't derive one from the other
derivation is very much a logical and
mathematical process if you stay within
the domain within a domain of
mathematics then you can derive the
conclusion from the premises given a
certain set of rules given a certain set
of rules of inference
it's what mathematics is about well
that's what philosophical logic is about
but observing stuff in the world and
then deciding what to do about it isn't
a straight line using derivation you
need explanation next paragraph has a
telling phrase David writes quite
generally in order to understand the
moral landscape in terms of a given set
of values one needs to understand some
facts being a certain way as well and
the converse is also true for example is
that philosopher Jacob Bronowski pointed
out success at making factual scientific
discoveries entails a commitment to all
sorts of values that are necessary for
making progress the individual scientist
has to value truth and good explanations
and to be open to ideas and to change
the scientific community in to some
extent the civilization as a whole has
to value tolerance integrity and
openness of debate we should not be
surprised of these connections the truth
has structural unit here as well as
logical consistency and I guess that no
true explanation is entirely
disconnected from any other since the
universe is explicable it must be that
morally right values are connected in
this way with true factual theories and
morally wrong values with false theories
moral philosophy is basically about the
problem of what to do next and more
generally what sort of life to lead and
what sort of world to want some
philosophers can find the term moral to
problems about how one should treat
other people but such problems are
continuous with problems of individuals
choosing what sort of life to lead which
is why I adopt a more inclusive
definition terminology aside if you were
suddenly the last humor on earth you
would be wondering what sort of life to
want deciding oh I should do whatever
pleases me most would give you very
little clue because what pleases you
depends on your moral judgment of what
constitutes a good life and not vice
versa
so that's profound there's a few moral
philosophies going around today or codes
of behavior one might say such as
effective altruism these purport to be
explanations of morality that are able
to provide a foundation or a framework
within which to
decide what we should do next now useful
as they might be for many situations the
problem is they cannot be an
all-encompassing moral philosophy
because moral philosophy can't be about
how to treat other people that might be
a very small part of moral philosophy
but essentially as David is saying here
if there were no other people they'd
still be a lot of moral questions if you
were the last person on earth you'd want
to know what you should do next you
wouldn't have anything to do with other
people because by definition there are
no other people there and moral
philosophy is also about what kind of
life to want if you're not sure about
what to do next then simply saying that
you should do whatever your preferences
are is not much use if you don't know
what you want to do and so therefore you
can't know what your preferences are
notice how let's continue this also
illustrates the emptiness of
reductionism in philosophy for if I
asked you for advice about what
objectives to pursue in life it is no
good telling me to do what the laws of
physics mandate I shall do that in any
case nor is it any good to tell me what
I prefer because I don't know what I
prefer to do until I've decided what
sort of life I want to lead or how I
should want the world to be since our
preferences are shaped in this way at
least in part by our moral explanations
it does not make sense to define right
and wrong entirely in terms of their
utility in meeting people's preferences
trying to do so is the project of the
influential moral philosophy known as
utilitarianism which played much the
same role as empiricism did in the
philosophy of science it acted as a
liberating focus for the rebellion
against traditional dogmas while its own
positive content contained very little
truth so there is no avoiding what to do
next problems and since the distinction
between right and wrong appears in our
best explanations that address such
problems we must regard that distinction
as real in other words there is an
objective difference between right and
wrong
those are real attributes of objectives
and behavior in Chapter 14
I shall argue that the same is true in
the field of aesthetics there is such a
thing as objective beauty